scaffolder-format(7) -- scaffolder authoring format using YAML
==============================================================

## SYNOPSIS

The scaffolder software allows the construction of genome scaffolds using text
files written in the YAML format. This man pages outlines the format for
specify the scaffold file. An example scaffold file with three entries is as
follows:

    ---
    -
      sequence:
        source: 'sequence1'
    -
      unresolved:
        length: 20
    -
      sequence:
        source: 'sequence2'
        start: 3
        stop: 100
        reverse: true
        inserts:
        -
          source: 'insert1'
          open: 5
          close: 20

## DESCRIPTION

Scaffold files are written using the YAML format. The scaffold file along with
the fasta file of corresponding sequences is used by the scaffolder software to
generate the scaffold super sequence.

The scaffold file should begin with three dashes `---`. This identifies the
start of a YAML formatted document. The scaffold file is composed of a list of
entries where each the sequence for all the entries are joined together to
create the scaffold super sequence. Each entry should should have a '-' dash
line to indicate the start of a new entry. The first line of the entry should
define the type of entry. The entry types are outlined in the section below.

## SCAFFOLD ENTRY TYPES

### SEQUENCE

These should be the main component of the scaffold and are used to insert
sequences from a fasta file into the scaffold. The `sequence` tag is used to
specify a sequence entry in the scaffold. The following tags can be used to
modify how the sequence is inserted into the scaffold:

  * `source:` <sequence-name>:
    **Required.** Specify the sequence to insert into the scaffold. The
    value <sequence-name> should match the first space delimited word from the
    fasta header of the required sequence.

  * `reverse:` <true|false>:
    **Optional.** Specify whether sequence should be reverse completed in the
    scaffold. Default value is false.

  * `start:` <trim-position>:
    **Optional.** Specify if the sequence should be trimmed from the start
    position. Default value is 1 where no sequence is removed.

  * `stop:` <trim-position>:
    **Optional.** Specify if the sequence should be trimmed from the end of the
    sequence. Sequence onward of trim position is removed. Default value is the
    length of the fasta sequence where no sequence is removed.

  * `inserts:` <insert-list>:
    **Optional.** Specify if additional insert sequences should be add to
    replace regions in this sequence.

### UNRESOLVED

Unresolved regions add sequences of N nucleotide characters to the scaffold.
They are used to define gaps in the scaffold and join separate sequence
sequence regions together. Unresolved regions are specified using the
`unresolved` tag. A single attribute tag is used to specify the length of an
unresolved region.

  * `length:` <length>:
    **Required.** Specify the length of the unresolved region to add to the
    scaffold.

### INSERTS

Insert sequences are used to replace regions in encoding [SEQUENCE][] entries.
Each insert should correspond to a sequence in the fasta file. Inserts share
the same attributes tags as [SEQUENCE][] entries but define two additional
`open` and `close` attributes. These specifying where the insert should be
added to the encoding sequence. Multiple inserts can be added as a list to the
encoding sequence entry using the `inserts` attribute tag. The following
attribute tags can be to modify how an insert is added to the scaffold.

  * `source:` <sequence-name>:
    **Required.** Specify the insert sequence to use. The value <sequence-name>
    should match the first space delimited word from the fasta header of the
    required insert sequence.

  * `reverse:` <true|false>:
    **Optional.** Specify whether the insert should be reverse complemented.
    Default value is false.

  * `start:` <trim-position>:
    **Optional.** Specify if the insert should be trimmed from the start
    position. Default value is 1 where no sequence is removed.

  * `stop:` <trim-position>:
    **Optional.** Specify if the insert should be trimmed from the end of the
    sequence. Sequence onward of trim position is removed. Default value is the
    length of the fasta sequence where no sequence is removed.

  * `open:` <insert-start-coordinate>:
    **Optional if close coordinate is specified.** Specify the start coordinate
    where the insert is added to the encoding sequence. Default value is the
    close coordinate position minus the length of the insert sequence.

  * `close:` <insert-close-coordinate>:
    **Optional if open coordinate is specified.** Specify the end coordinate
    position for adding the insert to the encoding sequence. Default value is
    the open coordinate position plus the length of the insert sequence.

## COPYRIGHT

**Scaffolder** is Copyright (C) 2010 Michael Barton
<http://michaelbarton.me.uk>
